* What rogue's messages mean		-*- outline -*-

Some people might think of this as a bit of a spoiler, so if you don't
want to know what messages like "You feel a strange pull downwards"
mean, you'd better stop reading now.


Being a bit of a hardened Nethack player :-), the messages in rogue
weren't all that familiar to me. I mean, from Nethack I knew that
armour glowing blue added to the armour's effectiveness (so I call
that '+ve armr'), but what's this stuff about feeling warm all over?
And what does fruit juice do?

After a while I decided to look at any Rogue source I could find to
see what the messages meant. My conclusions here are based on
experience in CP/M Rogue itself, combined with what an old Rogue 5.3
clone does for certain messages.


Anyway, here goes:


"You feel ill for a moment, then it passes"
It could be "slow digestion" or "hiccups".

"This is great: it makes you feel warm all over"
Sustain strength.

"This tastes very dull"
Aggravate monster...?

"You suddenly feel more skillful"
Dexterity...?

"You feel yourself moving faster"
Haste.

"You feel a strange pull downwards"
Tricky to say for sure, but I think this is what you get from a scroll
of detect gold when there's no gold on the level.

"Your hands start glowing green"
Confuse monster. The next monster you hit will be confused by your
hit. Then you get "Your hands stop glowing green". [1996 update - hmm,
I think I may have green/red the wrong way around. Surely *red* is
confuse...?]

"Your hands start glowing red"
Extra damage. The next monster you hit will be damaged more by your
hit than normal. Then you get "Your hands stop glowing red".

"You feel the presence of gold"
Detect gold.

"You feel the presence of monsters"
Detect monsters.

"You feel the presence of magic"
Detect magic.

"You hear a high-pitched humming noise"
Detect magic, when there's nothing appropriate on the level.

"Oh, now this scroll has a map on it"
Magic mapping.

"You feel as if someone is watching over you"
Scroll of remove curse. This removes curses from *everything* you're
carrying.

"You feel a strange sense of loss"
I think you get this if you zap (on yourself) a wand which is intended
to be used on monsters, with the `p' command.

"Your weapon glows blue for a moment"
Adds one to the weapon's enchantment.

"Your armour glows blue for a moment"
Adds one to the armour's enchantment.

"The corridor glows for a moment"
This happens if you read a scroll of light in a corridor. Corridors
are always lit, so it has no real effect.

"Hey - what's going on around here, who? what? huh?"
Confusion. The effects (unpredictable movement, etc.) only last a few
moves.

"You feel a wrenching sensation in your gut"
You've got the Amulet and have just gone back up a set of stairs. It
doesn't seem to mean anything much aside from that.

"My, that tasted good!" and "Yuk, that was awful!"
The first fends off hunger for up to 20% (I think) longer than the
second. It seems to be random which you get.

"Hit return to set R.N.G."
This mysterious message appears in the executable, but I've never seen
it in the game. It may be for debugging if "R.N.G." stands for random
number generator, the idea being that you could produce the same
'random' numbers each time.
